>> Hi, everybody.
So excited to see
you all here today.
So I'm assuming you came
to talk about shame, right.
No.
Yeah, I can't make up my
mind either by the way.
Yeah, so the first thing I
wanted to say some of you
have seen me obviously before.
Some of you have not.
I apologize if I trigger
the hell out of you today.
I'm pretty famous for it.
Well, I want you to
understand something about me
before we get into
this work, and it's
that I don't support
spiritual novocane.
What I mean by that
is that so much
of the stuff that we do in the
spiritual field and so many
of the tools that we have that
can be used as harmfully for us
as they can be used for good.
We all know that pain killers
have their place but--
by raise of hands, this
will be interesting.
How many of you
have known people
to get addicted to pain pills?
Now what if I told you the
spiritual field is basically
a pain pill today?
Some of you get where
I'm coming from?
So much of what we're
doing in this line of work
is to escape from
healing because it's
a coping mechanism.
We're using very
powerful tools actually
to go in the opposite
direction of healing,
and that is not what I'm about.
And those of you who
have any familiarity
with genuine healing
know that it is usually
really uncomfortable because
it causes you to look straight
at the things you
don't want to look at,
and that's definitely
the case with shame.
Shame does not exist without
us being a social species.
So the first thing that we
have to understand about shame
is that it exists
because we are social.
Every single one of you
has been socialized.
It's the process of you
coming in as a little kid
and being told, yes,
you can do that.
No, you can't do that.
Now funny thing happens.
When we grow up in
a social species,
our survival is dependent
upon our closeness
with the social group.
This has vast
implications because it
means that we have to actually
for the sake of survival
alter ourselves for
the sake of what
gets his approval in our
childhood experience.
And without that,
there's no shame.
If anybody has-- think
by raise of hands,
how maybe you've heard
of feral children?
Feral child sermon is
pretty interesting.
It's like when they get
a lot of these situations
in places that are war torn
areas where a family will just
abandon a kid, and for whatever
reason, it ends up surviving.
But because it doesn't
have any connection
to a human social group,
there is absolutely
no shame in their being.
They can run around on
four legs, bark at you
like they would a dog, and they
don't feel any of that thing
that we call shame.
It's because there has been
nobody to educate them into it.
So what's very
difficult about breaking
free of a shame-based
identity is
to admit that it
comes from the people
that you want to
be the closest to.
So the other thing
that I want you
to understand before I
break into this conversation
is that contrary to popular
belief, I am not anti-parent.
[LAUGHTER]
My dream is to get
all generations
to be healing together.
It's just rarely ever the case.
It's usually people
that are here,
and their family's
like, oh, Teal Swan
ruined our entire family
because this person healed away
from us.
[LAUGHTER]
It's not my intention I swear.
But we have to be brave
enough to actually realize
that there is no parent alive
today who is going to do
perfectly with their child.
And as a person who is a
conscious parent myself,
I hate that.
It's a nightmare
when you understand
the kind of damage that
you're doing to your children
isn't it?
You can see it can't you?
When you become
conscious enough,
you can see how
what you're doing
is going to have this outcome.
So it's hard to know--
if a person's not perfectly in
alignment, which no one really
is, and they're not
really perfectly in sync
with their own expansion and
they haven't perfectly healed,
then they are going to
affect their children.
That's the reality.
And even the way that
your society is set up
makes it rather
impossible as well.
So what parents are
trying to do today
is really do the best
they can with what
they have from where they are.
But that being
said, all of us have
to accept that no matter how
good your parents were or bad,
they actually did do damage.
They put you in a position
completely unintentionally
to have to heal.
So I'm going to show you up here
people learn better when they
are learning not only through my
voice but also through visuals.
So what I want to
do is to show you
how shame functions with
an actual demonstration
because hopefully this is going
to change the way that you see
shame for the rest of
your life because people
don't get what shame is.
You're going to be going
to all kinds of things,
probably even did during this
whole workshop event thing
that you were at, where people
are talking about shame.
How do we break free from shame?
But I want to just ask you
the question what is shame?
Just for a second,
just think about it.
And if somebody asks you the
question, what would you say?
>>
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> You see none of this is a
true understanding of shame.
Most of us say shame is a
feeling of unworthiness.
That's a most common
answer that you'll
get because that's what's been
propagated over and over again.
It's a feeling of not
being good enough.
That's not actually
what shame is.
And the emotion that we
have that we call shame
is actually secondary
to what shame is,
which is a biological
affective reaction.
Now you guys do know
it biological affective
reactions are because you
know what fight or flight is.
Fight or flight is an example
of a biological affective
reaction.
You can't not flinch if
something comes up to your face
and does that to you, can you?
What if I told you
shame was the same?
So what does this mean?
If shame in and of itself is a
biological affective reaction,
you can't get away from it.
It's not going to happen.
Now what we're calling
shame is a self-concept.
Actually it's just
a cascade of effects
that happen in the
psyche as a result of how
we respond to that biological
affective reaction.
This will make more
sense when I demonstrate
this entire thing on stage.
But the preface
is we got to stop
trying to get rid of shame.
Interesting, huh?
I have some nice
little volunteers.
You're going to be mom.
This is mom.
This could be dad.
This could be a school teacher.
This could be
anybody that matters
in your life experience.
Now before we introduce you to
mom's role in this whole thing,
I need you to get something.
As a social species for
thousands upon thousands
of years, your survival
depended upon your closeness
with the social group.
And it's no different today.
I love it when
people say they're
independent because
it's complete BS.
You're completely dependent
on whether somebody makes sure
that there's a road for
you to drive on today.
What would happen
today-- swear to God,
just think about it right now--
there's no more food
the grocery store.
What do you do?
Most of you in a metropolitan
city die by the way.
So you're totally dependent.
And even beyond that.
We're dependent upon
others because we
have emotional needs.
And regardless of what you have
heard in the spiritual field,
those emotional needs
cannot be met by you.
I realize that I'm going to
get aggressive with this,
and most people don't like it.
Why?
Because so many of us find our
way into the spiritual field
because we have
been hurt by people.
You don't go looking for God
if your family's awesome.
You don't.
Yeah.
You go looking for
things like that
when you need to find love from
somewhere else, because you're
not getting it.
Now it's really
profoundly painful
to not get those
emotional needs met.
So what we do is we gravitate
towards spiritual philosophies
that tell us, you
don't need to need it.
Everything you want,
you can find within.
But in my view, this is not
only a complete rejection
of ourselves as people,
it's causing so much damage
on the planet today to
stay as disconnected
as we are from each other.
Why aren't we teaching
people to have
intimate relationships and
lifelong connections instead?
Are you with me?
OK.
Even back in the cave
days and still today, you
have to be close to the people
in your life experience.
Closeness is everything.
If you took a tiny baby, even
today, just tiny little baby,
laid them out on the
sidewalk, it takes hours
before that child's dead.
You are totally
relationally dependent.
And this is extreme
for a physical human,
more so than it is for
another animal species.
So a deer, right?
Let's just take a deer.
A deer is born, and
within hours, it's up,
and it's roaming around.
It doesn't have to nurse
on its mother for years,
you know what I mean?
That's a deer.
That's better than a human.
All right?
We are not walking
around up to deer
in the middle of some
meadow and saying,
you know, you're pretty
dependent on your social group.
I'm thinking you should probably
develop some independence
because they could
leave you one day.
Right?
You wouldn't do that
to a deer, would you?
We wouldn't do it to a deer.
We don't do it to horses.
We understand why dogs
go to hell when they're
stuck in a pen by themselves.
But we expect this of ourselves.
I got a problem with this.
Because, yet again, so
much of spirituality
is about denying
our physicality,
denying our biology.
We need to integrate our biology
and integrate our humanity,
not try to get away from it.
[APPLAUSE]
So let's look at how shame
fits into the picture.
This is mom.
Now mom wants the
best for us, right?
It's a rare parent that's
like, I deliberately
want to destroy your life.
Maybe some of you had those.
But what she's not going to
be aware that she's doing
is going into an
attitude of disapproval.
The socialization process is
about reward and punishment.
It's about approval
and disapproval.
And so a child doesn't have
to even receive words in order
to perceive that judgment.
I know you know what it's
like when your mom or dad just
casts you that look, right?
This is what happens.
I'm using you guys.
OK, so, mom, over there.
What do you disapprove of?
Put yourself in the
scenario in childhood.
She's five.
Let's make her five.
>> Bothering me.
>> OK.
>> OK, so I [INAUDIBLE].
>> Why are you bothering her?
>> Because I want
to know things.
>> I don't have time.
I don't have time.
I have too much
going on in my head.
I need to focus on me.
>> OK, did you feel that?
So that was actually
a pretty light one.
But if you were to look at
the energy between them,
is what she just did
a push-away or a pull?
>> Push-away.
>> I want you to get really
attuned to this, by the way,
because there are two primary
movements within the universe
when it comes to relationships--
to push away and to
include as part of oneself.
So away and towards--
these are the two movements
you need to concern
yourself with so as
to understand this full picture.
When a parent does something,
say something, or even
just emits the energy of
pushing away their child,
what happens to the nervous
system of the child?
>> Fight or flight.
This child has to re-establish
closeness immediately.
What has she made an enemy of
in this particular circumstance?
>> Questions.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Needs.
What it is that when a kid
wants to know the answer,
when they want your
time, it's like--
right?
And so what the child perceives
in this circumstance is
it's not OK to need me,
it's not OK to want me.
So the child, even on
a subconscious level,
what's getting rejected
in me is the need for mom.
That is not OK.
So what she has to
do to re-establish
a relationship with her mother
is to triangulate internally.
You guys understand
triangulation yet?
This is really cool.
OK.
I know you do.
You just don't know you do.
Ready for this?
Pretend they're not who they
are in their roles right now.
Pretend that she and
I, we know each other,
and we also know her.
Triangulation is, you
know, I don't really
think she should have
treated you that way.
Who does she think she is?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> You're way better.
>> So am I.
[LAUGHTER]
What I just did was to establish
rapport and closeness here
through exclusion.
So what you're doing-- and
this is the first movement
of shame--
is to triangulate internally.
The way to re-establish the
relationship with the parent
is to push a part
of yourself away.
So let's say that this is
the needy aspect, right?
So stand in front
of one another.
Right now, the psyche is united.
When we're first born,
there are some caveats,
but for the sake of
your understanding,
pretend that when
you're first born,
your psychology, your
being, is united.
And when we encounter
circumstances like this,
it can't stay united.
It actually has to fracture
and fragment in order to cope.
And so much of
what you're dealing
with in your adult life
that is causing you
problems is because of
this fragmentation process.
So in the moment that the mom
pushed her away like that,
she has to triangulate by
establishing closeness here,
by pushing the part of
her that needs away.
So show what that
looks like, physically.
Yeah.
Look at the triangle.
Now this is all happening in
an invisible way, internally.
But what's set up here
now is a triangle,
whereby this one gets closer to
mom by pushing a part of itself
away.
This is what shame is.
This is your
definition of shame.
Ready?
I'm changing your
definition of shame.
Shame is to push
yourself away from you.
You can't do that, can you?
On a physical level.
Because obviously, if
I was to take a knife,
draw it down my body,
I can't do that.
I'm not living anymore.
That's not how
physicality works,
but it is how
consciousness works.
The way that I
manage to push myself
away is by splitting
myself in half.
Now the scary part-- and this
is where most of you are going
to relate to this
as a self-concept--
all of us have done this, OK?
So all of us have
parts of ourselves
that we experience
that rejection of,
and so we created that shame.
This is the biological
affective reaction
of pushing that part
away from ourselves.
All of us have done this.
But if you grew up
in a circumstance
where you were in specific
roles in childhood,
like the scapegoat--
you guys know what that is?
Well, in a dysfunctional
family home,
everybody has these
different roles.
And unfortunately, I
think I've probably
met two families in my lifetime
that don't fall somewhere
on the spectrum of dysfunction.
This is the way that a human
social group functions.
It goes beyond the family.
You see these
roles in companies.
You see them in sports teams.
Anywhere that humans congregate.
It's this funny way of trying
to establish relationships.
And the scapegoat
child in the family
is the carrier of
the family problem.
So what the family
first does is say, well,
that one's the one
with all the problems,
and now we're going to
get all of our self-esteem
by dealing with
that one's problems.
And it becomes the
way that the family
doesn't focus on themselves.
And the scapegoat
child is the nightmare
for people who are in
the psychological field
because mom and dad are
always dragging that kid in,
like, fix the kid.
And it's really not the kid.
So if you're in that type
of a dynamic in childhood,
you can imagine that this
happens over and over again.
I am a little bit curious.
How many of you would
relate to the idea
of having at least one parent
who you could not please?
So a fair bit.
Your self-concept of shame.
The reason is is because
you kept doing this, over
and over again.
It wasn't just the part of
you that's needy, right?
Maybe it's the part of you
that poses as a competition
to that parent.
You ended up fracturing
like this over, and over,
and over, and over, in trying
to establish connection
with this parent by pushing
this part, and that part,
and this part, and that part,
and this part, and that part
away.
So now your self-concept is I'm
worth nothing, and I'm no good.
So if you've got that type
of a core self-concept,
this triangulation has
happened over and over again.
You actually look internally
a bit like a matrix.
So do you want to know
how to remedy this issue?
>> Yeah.
>> Now that I've made you
do a deep dive into hell?
OK.
First, I'm actually
curious, what
are some of the strategies
that you have heard
other teachers talk
to you about in terms
of resolving your shame?
>> Self-love.
>> Embrace it.
>> Well, that would be genius,
but do they tell you how?
>> No.
[LAUGH]
>> Personal pet peeve.
I actually wrote a
book on self-love
because this was
driving me crazy,
because this is me as well.
When I was starting to
learn this whole process
of self-love, it drove me crazy
how many people would tell me,
you just need to love yourself.
But when this is your
life, it's like, well, you
might as well tell me to build
a rocket ship, to successfully
build a new colony on Mars,
because that would be easier.
Thank you.
So I didn't understand
exactly what self-love meant.
I can show you up here.
I'm about to.
But the majority
of the strategies
that people have
for resolving shame
is to try to get you
to see that you're not
that negative thing that
you have disowned, rejected,
and denied.
Right?
So let's say that
you've got a woman who
feels like she's super fat.
Now most people who are dealing
with that fat-based shame
would say, well, let's look at
all the ways you're not fat.
Let's look at how
you're beautiful, right?
Actually, you've
enhanced the split.
Do you see why?
You're making the shame
worse with that strategy,
which is why it doesn't work.
Or why you go to
a seminar, and you
get a tiny bit of Novocaine,
and then it's done the second
you leave the room.
And you're back to square one.
But just to see if you can
mentally figure this out
for yourselves, looking
at this dynamic,
just physically, how
it's playing out here,
what is the solution to
shame, knowing that to shame
is to push something
away from yourself?
What's the remedy?
>> Pull it closer.
>> Yes.
So how?
>> [INAUDIBLE].
>> Naming it, like you
did, and then [INAUDIBLE]..
>> Well, naming it's good.
Yeah.
It's good for us
to become conscious
of the parts of ourselves
that we are pushing away.
Compassion's the answer.
Compassion is the
antidote to shame.
Any of you who
brought your notebook
should be writing that one down.
Compassion is going to be
your first step towards love.
To love something is to take
something as part of yourself.
I want that to be your
new definition of love.
Because when people
are approaching
love as if it's this just
elated, emotional state,
you can't get there.
It's actually not
going to work for you.
If you have a part
of yourself that you
have been taught is
detestable, a part of you
that you've been
pushing away forever,
to try to just feel really
super warm and fuzzy
towards that aspect
isn't going to happen.
What can happen is curiosity.
Now compassion, this is
why I'm saying compassion
is actually the antidote
to the shame-based process,
because compassion arises from
commonality, from shared pain.
That means that the root of
compassion is understanding.
By raise of hands,
how many of you
have watched a movie
where there's a bad guy,
and everyone else in
that theater is like,
I hate that guy.
And you're like, oh,
crap, I relate to them.
[LAUGHTER]
The reason you feel
that way, and you're not
pushing that part away, is
because you relate to them.
This is how to find compassion.
If you can't relate
to something,
you can't have
compassion for it.
And if you want to develop
compassion for something,
find out how to relate to it.
So if that means that you,
your central consciousness,
let's call it, you've
got to look at the aspect
that you really have
been pushing away,
the one that you currently
hate or have decided
is not appropriate.
And you try to relate to it.
That means I've got to develop
intimacy with that part.
Intimacy, by the
way, is the opposite
of pushing something away.
To have intimacy with something
is to feel into it, to see it
completely, to listen
to it, is to come
to a perfect understanding
of that thing.
So you've got to
dive deep into it.
Jacques Cousteau could
not do that with the ocean
if he was doing this
on the shore, you know?
So you've got to
become super curious
of that part of yourself.
You get that so far?
>> Yeah.
>> Interesting, huh?
Now this is what's really fun.
When you feel that
feeling of emotion,
that feeling called
shame, right?
That emotional feeling
that you associate with it.
I actually would rather refer
to this, rather than emotion,
as a feeling signature.
Just like fight or flight
is a feeling signature
that happens in your body.
It goes off, and you
feel the adrenaline hit.
That feels a certain way, right?
When this fragmentation
process happens internally
as a result of shame, you
feel a signature in your body.
Become familiar with it,
because it's actually
different for each person.
That feeling only occurs when
there's a separation internally
that occurs.
Isn't that interesting?
So it's almost like,
on an emotional level,
you know how it feels a
certain way to cut your leg.
It feels a certain way when
two parts are splitting away
internally.
That's what you're
calling shame.
If you can, pull
that part that you've
pushed away back into yourself.
>> Aww.
>> You no longer
feel the sensation.
You will not feel shame.
This is the antidote to shame.
So what we need to preoccupy
ourselves with is this.
When somebody reacts towards
you in a rejecting way,
in that moment, you have the
option to push that part away
or to bring it closer.
And if that's how you
continue to react whenever
you get that kick, that
feeling that you call shame,
you will not be
fragmenting anymore.
You're not going to
be walking around
with this feeling of
what you call shame.
Sound good?
>> Yeah.
>> OK.
Do I have any questions so far?
No?
I should do a mic.
>> Oh, it's OK.
I'm loud.
>> You're loud?
>> Can you give, actually,
example of situations?
Describe an actual
feeling sensation?
>> Well, come here.
Are you brave enough
to be up on stage?
>> Of course.
I was brave enough to
give you a hug yesterday.
>> Thank you.
>> Very scary.
So yeah, for example,
mom, mom, mom.
Stop.
Blah, blah, blah.
Pushed away, to be close to mom.
>> No, but in your life?
>> In mine?
Oh, now you're making me scared.
[LAUGHTER]
What am I ashamed of?
OK, I'm going to be bold enough.
Here I am.
I really feel deeply
for you since yesterday.
>> I'm glad I grew
on you so fast.
>> And part of me
feel shame to show it.
Even to tell you, it's scary,
and I'm using this opportunity.
And it would make
me feel weak if I
show my interest to you or even
more love, something like that.
>> OK.
>> So I push--
and you see me--
I push that part of me.
I put my warrior pants
on, and I pretend
I have no feelings of
love for anyone else,
especially for you.
I'm just fine,
whatever, I'm there.
Yeah, and definitely
feel disconnected.
>> OK, so the part of you that's
not OK is the part that is
vulnerable because it loves.
Right?
>> Yeah.
>> That's what you're saying?
>> Vulnerability,
yeah, intimacy.
>> Do you think you can
accurately become that?
>> Vulnerability?
>> Yeah.
>> I'll try.
>> OK, as if you're facing
this aspect yourself,
let's come to
understand it, shall we?
>> Mm.
>> So what's the first step
of really seeing into it?
Where did it start?
Origins are a very
good place, by the way,
to start with the part of you
that you feel ashamed about.
When did I begin
feeling this way
towards this aspect of self?
When did you learn
it was not OK?
>> I grew up in an
orphanage to be a soldier,
and all the feelings were
literally beat up out of me
till seven-year-old.
Yeah, since childhood.
I did now allow to cry or feel.
>> So imagine-- this is
where shame cells come in.
You ready for this?
I love this, because I
want you to pick something
today to work on with this.
When you take the aspect of
you that you're ashamed of,
if you close your
eyes right now--
I want you to all
try this, actually.
Close your eyes and think
about the part of you
that you're the very
most ashamed about.
Like for her, for example,
it's the part of her
that feels that vulnerability
for loving someone.
If you closed your eyes, and
you met this part of yourself
like it was a
separate being, almost
appearing to you in a
black or a white room,
how would this
part of you that is
the embodiment of your shame,
what would it look like?
How would it appear?
It could be human.
It could be not-human.
Just look at that.
How did it appear to
you in your mind's eye?
Now you can answer the
question for us, for you.
>> Mother.
>> It appears like a mother.
>> Yeah, I never had one,
and all those feelings are
associated with a mother
energy, nurturing.
>> Not what I mean.
>> Oh.
You said as if human.
>> I know, but what
it is, see, that,
that's you actually trying to
get away from the vulnerable
aspect.
The part I want
you to picture is
the part that feels that
that love and that need,
it's like the embodiment
of your shame-based self,
the one you've made not OK.
>> Mm.
Well, weak.
>> What does weakness
look like to you?
>> Ugly.
Um--
>> I'll give you an example,
and it'll make it easier, OK?
Ready?
>> Yeah, sure.
>> All right, so I grew up
with a bra-burning hippie.
And what that meant is pink
was not allowed in my house.
That's something that dumb girls
wear, even though I loved pink.
Femininity was like a hell no.
So when I was maybe
12, 13, 14, started
getting interested in
dressing sexier and makeup,
how do you think that went over
with my bra-burning mother?
>> Whore.
>> Yeah, exactly.
That's exactly what
she used to call me
when I'd walk downstairs.
So I learned that to establish
closeness with my mother,
I would have to deny, reject,
and disown my sexuality.
Now the first time
that I did this process
with this aspect of
myself, if I closed my eyes
and saw what that part
that I was rejecting
looked like, it
looked like a siren.
Now I had an association--
this is what you'll notice,
your parts will always relate
to some association you have.
I had this association
with the sirens,
you know, these women who lure
these sailors in from shore,
and then you look at their
feet, and it's bones, right?
So what it looked like in the
mind's eye was that part of me
was this siren,
affixed to a rock.
Now the first reaction
that I had to that image
was total repulsion, right?
I want nothing to
do with that aspect.
I especially don't want that
because my feeling that I
had at the time was like, would
I really want a relationship?
Now when I looked
closer at this part
internally, what
I realized was it
kept shooting laser
beams out of its eyes.
This is just how it
appeared in my mind's eye.
It kept shooting
these laser beams
and killing all
these men that were
coming into shore off of boats.
And I noticed that the
energy of the siren herself
was totally miserable about it.
It was almost like she
couldn't control that
and wanted a relationship,
but every time
she opened her eyes
towards a man, he'd die.
So that was the first
understanding breakthrough
that I had towards
that part of myself.
It actually really desperately
wants a relationship,
but feels like it is a danger
to men, which is exactly what I
felt like based on my mother's
reaction, that sexuality,
especially blatant--
what do you call that--
seduction was a
danger to others.
>> OK.
Got it.
>> Does that make more sense?
>> Yeah.
I think what it was for me
that it's going to be burden.
My vulnerability, my
weakness, my femininity,
perhaps, it will be
burden to others.
>> So the part of
you that is a burden.
Close your eyes.
What does that part look like?
>> Little orphan,
without needing love.
>> Is it a boy or a girl orphan?
>> Girl.
>> What's she dressed like?
>> Naked.
>> What kind of a setting?
>> What kind of what?
>> What's the setting?
>> Abandoned, like
you just mentioned.
Abandoned on the street.
>> OK.
How do you feel
towards that part?
>> Well, now I embrace it.
I love it.
Now.
>> If that was the truth, you
wouldn't have that reaction
towards me.
>> It's knee-jerk reaction,
a habit, until I observe it.
But OK, if I go back,
yeah, it feels--
I don't even know.
Like nobody wants it.
Nobody wants it.
It's in the shelter, and
everybody takes the good ones.
And then bold, little
one, black with bold eyes,
nobody wants it.
So, yeah.
>> And that's how you
actually feel, isn't it?
>> Yeah.
>> This is where
compassion comes in.
You can relate to that pain.
>> Yeah, of course.
>> Is it wrong for
that aspect to need?
>> Of course not.
>> What does she really deserve?
>> Well, here, back to
self-love, at least, first,
to love itself.
Yeah, it deserves love.
At least, your own, my own.
>> So here's this one,
tiny, little step.
Now this is just one part
of the process, by the way.
Mentally, if you can
imagine that orphan child,
can you imagine what can
be done in that scene
to create an improvement in
the way that that child feels?
>> Yeah, I'd pick
her up and hug her.
>> So close your eyes and do it.
Do it.
>> Yeah, I'd pick her
up, and embrace it,
and say thank you for this, and
just connect deeply from heart.
>> And then what?
>> Embrace it and love it.
>> Are you going to keep that
baby with you all the time?
>> Yeah.
Well-- um--
[LAUGHTER]
It's there.
It's there, of course.
And it will show up, like
today, even 30 years later.
And just embracing
that part, like, OK, I
know where you're coming from.
Maybe there is no need
to show up right now,
but loving and embracing that
part of me, and knowing it's
there--
>> Can I suggest something?
>> Yeah, of course.
>> Sitting with you right now,
it feels like you're playing
the role that caregivers
played in your childhood again,
which is like, I
get it, I see it,
I can't really do
very much about it,
because I'm not really a mom.
Have you thought about bringing
a mother into that aspect?
>> What mother?
>> Any mother.
The ideal mother.
Just play with me for a minute.
Going back to the
scene where you've
got this little orphan child,
what would the perfect mother
be like?
I know you imagined one.
>> Yeah, to pick her up.
>> Yeah, but what
does she look like?
What does feel like?
Is she big?
Is she skinny?
What's she dressed like?
>> I feel it's still me.
>> You really want to be a mom?
>> No, but I'm a mom to
that orphan, it's within me.
>> And that's what you want?
>> Do I want it?
I mean, I am it.
>> I'm trying to stretch you a
little bit because you've got
the mentality that I
have to do it all myself.
>> Got you.
OK, yes.
>> That's part of that dynamic
that's keeping you stuck.
>> Blind spot, OK, I see it.
Yeah.
>> So my suggestion is it might
be more healing to bring--
>> Someone else for
that mother energy.
OK.
Do you want me to
look at you for that?
>> If you want.
>> Is that what you're saying?
Like my reaction--
[LAUGHTER]
But that's what you're saying,
that my reaction towards you
was looking for
that part in you.
Maybe I saw it.
I can relate to it.
Yeah, of course.
>> If you want to use
me, it doesn't matter.
That'd be wonderful.
>> Well, this example,
instead of imaginary,
that's actually example
of what I felt yesterday.
I felt like I turned to
face something that was
intimidating, but then-- and I
was sharing it with some people
here--
the way you were, it was that
feminine, nurturing energy.
And actually, related to what
you said, you went to hug,
and in that embrace, I
felt that I can be myself.
>> Yes.
>> And it was really
an experience.
>> So use me.
>> Yeah, I just did.
[LAUGHTER]
>> No, I want you to imagine.
Just do it.
Imagine, right now,
imagine me coming in
with this orphan child.
Now feel what it feels
like for me to say,
I'm going to take
care of her forever.
You don't have to worry
about her anymore.
You can see her whenever you
want to, but all of her needs
are going to be met by me.
Now imagine the attunement.
What I mean by that is
that every time this child
makes a noise, I'm going
to try to understand
exactly what she needs.
What does that feel
like in your body?
>> Peace.
>> Do you feel the feeling of
pushing yourself away in this
moment?
>> No.
>> There you have the
antidote to shame.
Now you can do this exercise.
This is just an easy one
to do in your mind's eye.
I like to give you
guys this exercise,
because how many times do we
run into these circumstances
in a day, where
somebody says something,
we feel it as a
rejection, and we
respond by rejecting that
part of ourselves, right?
If, in that moment, you
can close your eyes,
and see the part of
you you're rejecting,
and do anything like this, it's
basically a mental resolution
process, it's just
a visualization,
you will feel the
sensation vanish.
It's really creepy,
actually, you guys.
It's really creepy
how easy it is.
>> Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
Do you guys want to understand
a tiny bit more about
how the fragmentation
process works
in terms of protector parts?
>> Yeah.
>> Since I've got you
guys on stage, ha ha.
Because you actually got to
see a really good one just now,
I think I'm going to
use that as an example.
So let's say you
got a little girl.
You're going to be the
little girl this time again.
>> OK.
>> You're good for this role.
>> Thanks.
>> OK.
So you've got a
little girl here who's
in an orphan-type situation.
It does not matter whether
this child wants a family,
wants a dedicated mother or not.
It's not happening, is it?
This is the type of circumstance
where there is no resolution.
Do you guys
understand resolution?
You get to a place,
it's like you're getting
to the opposite place, right?
So resolution is if
something's broken, it's fixed,
or healed, or put together.
If someone's lonely, there's no
loneliness, there's connection.
If you're in this
type of a situation,
there's no resolution
because this child is not
going to have a parent.
So this is when we have to cope.
Coping, even though it saves
your ass in the beginning,
always leads to problems
in the long-run.
So in this circumstance,
how is she going to cope?
Knowing that coping
is all about,
how do I keep myself safe
and feeling the best possible
in the scenario that I
can't change anything?
You just saw it on stage.
What's the answer?
>> I don't need it.
>> Yes.
So she's going to split into
a part that does not need it
and the part that's suppressed,
which really needs it.
Because this is the one that
kept her safe her whole life,
this is one she's
going to identify with.
Now there's this connection
that happens here.
Because this is the one
that keeps you safe,
the connection's
here, which means
that this part of
the personality
is what's feeding through
the physical embodiment.
And so when you guys
are sitting here,
looking at this
person, like you just
were, looking at this
person from the outside,
how are you going
to describe them?
>> Tough.
Strong.
>> Yes, that's a tough person,
that's a strong person,
pretty scary.
Little bit scared to
cross that person.
Definitely doesn't need anyone.
You will literally describe
this person this way.
Is it the truth of them?
>> No.
>> The truth is actually both.
See, in an integrated space,
which is what's healthy for us,
we are actually the
fusion of all polarities.
So we are as independent
as we are dependent.
But when we polarize like
this so as to stay safe,
we become profoundly unstable
and profoundly unhealthy,
because we have split
ourselves in order to cope.
This gets us into
a hell of a lot
of trouble in our
day-to-day life
because she wants
a relationship.
This part is still
a part of her.
Now she's going to reject,
and deny, and disown it,
so this is going to be delegated
to the subconscious mind,
right?
You've done enough healing
that you're aware of it.
But I can't tell you how many
people I meet, especially
in the special ops--
I love working with those guys.
They're like, I don't know
what you're talking about.
[LAUGHTER]
I'm like, OK, this is
going to take a few more
years to even
admit that we might
have a little kid inside
still who needs someone.
If something is delegated
to the subconscious,
it's in the process
of being suppressed.
And what makes that so dangerous
is that suppression is still
energy.
So to the degree
that we feed this one
with our conscious energy, we
feed that one with just as much
equal subconscious energy.
The more that you
suppress something,
the bigger of a monster it
becomes in the floorboards.
And then we all know about
what happens with monsters.
They can't stay under
the floorboards for long.
They always end up breaking
through in some way.
Now you're in a time-space
reality that is based off
of the law of attraction.
It drives me nuts what
people teach about that.
But a better way of calling
this is the law of mirroring.
If you live in a world
that is based off
of the law of
mirroring, which you do,
everything that is
internal is going
to reflect in the
external as someone else.
So this means you're going to
be attracting people who reflect
both this part and this part.
But have you noticed
something funny?
A magnet-- positive
and negative do what?
>> Attract.
>> So is she going to be
attracted to people like this?
>> No.
She's going to be attracted
to people like that.
It's a way, actually,
that the universe
helps you to integrate.
Loving, slash, obnoxious, right?
When you meet somebody who is
the external representation
of an aspect of yourself
that you have pushed away,
you will feel instantly
one of two ways.
Either you're going
to fall in love
with this person,
head over heels,
have no idea why you
can't live without them.
Or you are going to want
to run so far and so fast,
you never want to
see them again.
Fun, huh?
So when people are
talking about everything
you meet in the
outside is actually
a reflection of the inside, this
is what they're talking about.
Fun, huh?
But most of you are not
even aware of the parts
that you've
subconsciously suppressed.
So this means any
time you meet somebody
in your external
reality, that is you.
You actually have to own
it as part of yourself.
It's a lot easier
said than done.
Do I have any questions so
far about this whole thing?
I should get a microphone
in the audience somehow.
I didn't think through this one.
Thank you.
>> So since shame is so
effective at keeping us away
from each other, if
you're a woman or a man,
and I do what you're
saying to do, like,
I become one with myself
and these different aspects,
so now, I've got to relate
to all these people.
And there's a lot of
bad people out there.
There's a lot of
people who don't
have my self-interest intact.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And so I don't
want to lose my shame,
because if I get close to these
people, I'm going to get hurt.
>> Are you up to
working up here?
>> Sure.
[APPLAUSE]
>> So you're saying
you enjoy your shame?
>> I was sort of being sardonic.
>> OK, so say it again in
a way that's not that way.
>> Um.
So when I feel shame, I'm
not getting close to people
in my life.
>> Yes.
>> And I would like to with
my son and other people.
Yet, I'm very successful in
some ways, so it's worked.
So why do I want to give it up?
>> Because you're
lonely as hell.
>> Because I what?
>> Because you're lonely.
>> But I have a lot of
amazing people in my life.
>> That you're
not very close to.
>> But I'm not lonely.
[LAUGHTER]
I love myself.
>> No, you don't.
[LAUGHTER]
>> No, but I came here, and
I learned how to love myself.
I went to a bunch of seminars.
[LAUGHTER]
I read your--
>> Yeah, but here's the thing--
self-love is a process.
Self-love is a process.
I can't look at
you today and say
I am completely self-loving.
Do you know how much
work I do on myself?
>> Probably more than
most people ever do.
>> Yes.
>> Probably more than most
people do combined in this
room.
>> Yes, exactly.
To be sitting in this
position where I am today,
this is what I'm doing when
you're at the movie theater.
This is what I'm doing when
you're working your day job.
This is my life,
day in and day out.
I do not love myself completely.
There is no possible
way you can look at me
and say, "I love
myself completely."
>> Well, then that's
why you're not happy,
because you don't love yourself.
>> Exactly.
Yes.
Why am I talking
to you like this?
I'm talking to you because
you've got to get this.
We have this idea
that there's going
to be some pill
we can take where
overnight, [SNAP] the entire
process of fragmentation
is resolved.
Now let me tell you, if I find
that button, I will teach it.
[LAUGHTER]
I will throw everything that
I have done out the window.
There's a reason I'm teaching
what I am teaching today.
I have not found
that button yet,
and I have not met someone
who has that button.
I have met a lot of people
who lie that they have it.
And that is what
scares me to death.
>> And those people have
a lot of power, sometimes,
in our life, and a lot of money,
and they can hurt us really
bad.
>> Yes, they can.
But where are we
going with that?
>> I don't know.
>> Love is a practice.
Do you want me to tell you how I
got the closest that I possibly
could get to it?
>> Yes.
>> OK.
It is the rejection
of self that is
causing this problem that
you have with other people.
It's actually self-betrayal.
Now you should be
listening to this.
Whenever I go into
the space of this
is a problem because something
you, yourself, is doing,
it's a big deal, because I
like to teach relationships.
I'm the one that doesn't
teach that you're
the root of everything, right?
I'm not teaching you that
everything you can find
is from within.
So when I tell you that there's
a pattern that's originating
internally, listen carefully.
What causes us to
fear other people
is actually self-betrayal.
And we are doing this
towards ourself all day
long, all day long.
I watched myself
do it yesterday.
I needed to go up to my room
probably an hour before I
actually went.
I was bulldozing a part of
myself for an hour straight,
and I teach this stuff.
>> But the self-betrayal,
we're taught that,
and we can earn a lot of money.
Because if I'm denying
the aspect of myself,
my creative side, my music
side, I make a lot of money
as a lawyer or a
financial accountant.
And then I can buy a
house, and then I'm cool.
>> Is that the way you
want the world to be?
I mean this literally.
>> No, absolutely not.
>> Then you got to stop it.
You know?
There comes a point--
I swear to God, there comes this
point-- you're probably there,
aren't you?
Where it's like,
I either continue
to perpetuate a world that
is this way because this
is the way that it
works so far, or I
decide I can't do it anymore.
And what I'm hoping--
and I'm wanting this to
be a whole movement here--
I'm hoping that people
are willing to be
uncomfortable enough to
change the way the world is.
This is the opposite of coping.
[APPLAUSE]
>> But a lot--
but when we're in--
when we're in relationships,
and we're having this dynamic,
let's say I watch your videos,
and interact with people,
and I make them
uncomfortable, they run.
They're like, oh,
you're not supposed
to make me uncomfortable.
If I'm feeling bad, this is
wrong, so I'm going away.
>> Then get different friends.
[LAUGHTER]
>> What if that happens to
be your mom or your son?
>> Well, with children,
that's a whole other shebang.
I might do a whole
separate workshop
on just parenting
for this reason.
But there will
come a point where
a person has to be lonely enough
to decide into relationships,
you know?
We've got this
attitude where it's
like, I've got to change
the way that everybody is.
I have to change them so that
they can be in a relationship.
Literally, you have to
choose with your free will
to be in a relationship.
It's going to make
you uncomfortable.
And we can't make
people make that choice.
>> But a lot of people, they
think they're exercising
their free will when they're
engaging in things that
aren't making them comfortable.
They don't want to engage
their authentic free will
to be uncomfortable
to be close to people.
>> Yes.
So you can't have
a relationship.
You can't have a
relationship with that.
>> But if we're being
rewarded for that,
how do we change that?
Meaning that we're
rewarded in the marketplace
by being an asshole accountant
or an asshole lawyer.
You make a lot of money.
>> Start a different
marketplace.
Most of you, by the way, who
are sitting in this room,
you're going to be in this
position, where it's not
going to work anymore to fit
yourself into a world that
is dysfunctional.
It will not happen.
You're going to have
to be a pioneer.
That day sucks.
It sucked for me.
There was a day when I
realized I don't fit in here.
It's never going to happen.
Because what my vision
is, it doesn't exist yet.
So then it's about I got
to be the one to do it.
And then you meet people who
are actually also doing it.
It's like you're stepping
out on the wave of expansion,
thinking, I'm the
only one out here.
And then you look sideways,
and you're like, oh, crap.
You were just in
a different city.
It will happen.
It's this uncomfortable
transition
is where you are right now.
>> But I think that's
emblematic of a lot of people.
It's not wanting to
be uncomfortable.
The one you talk about in
one of your videos where
there's a sinking
boat, and then you're--
>> Yep.
>> What's that one called?
>> I don't remember.
>> Endurism.
>> Yeah, the universe
will sink your ship.
>> Right.
>> I remember that one.
What about it?
>> Meaning that it's difficult
to jump ship from the sinking
boat that we're used to swimming
in or living in, and jump
on that other boat, because--
>> But are you worried
about doing that yourself,
or are you worried about
forcing other people to do that?
>> I think a
combination of both.
Because why would I want
to jump off my boat,
and then there's no
one else in the sea?
In other words, I jump on
that lifeboat that's cool,
and everybody else is on
the Titanic that's sinking.
Why would I want to do that?
>> I'm not going to be able
to make this safe for you.
See, what you're watching,
I hope you can recognize.
See, this is a perfect moment.
I want you to recognize
this in yourself.
We got to own this
as ourselves, right?
All of us have this aspect.
All of us have this
aspect that say--
>> And I'm dramatizing
it on purpose too.
>> Good.
Thank you.
I think.
[LAUGHTER]
>> I'm actually not this
difficult in real life.
[LAUGHTER]
Actually, some people
would disagree with that.
>> I love this though.
I love that you're like, well,
I'm not really like this.
This is just an entire act.
I don't know why I can't
have relationships.
[LAUGHTER]
You know I love you, right?
OK, so I don't even understand
where we're going with this?
Where are we going with this?
There's no way that you can
make somebody comfortable enough
to take that risk.
I think it's one of the hardest
things about being awake
in any way.
And I'm not in this boat alone.
I know you guys
are in this boat.
Where you understand what
cliff someone's headed
towards if they don't
shift something,
and you still can't
make it happen.
>> That's what
I'm talking about.
>> Other than realizing that
everyone has their own free
will and being willing to feel
your emotions when they hit
the cliff, there is
nothing you can do.
You can't steal someone's free
will from them, no matter what.
>> But a lot of people aren't
really exercising it though.
You know that.
>> Of course I know that.
But I also can't
force them to, can I?
But this is the thing that
I wish that we would all
get about the universe, if
only just for ourselves,
the universe not
so lovingly, slash,
lovingly, does this thing
where if you won't shift,
the reflection will get bigger.
And then if you don't shift,
it will get even bigger.
And then the day comes-- this
is the day most people are ready
for my workshops--
the day comes--
[LAUGH]
The day comes where you hit
a wall so big that you can't
run away anymore, can you?
Doesn't matter whether
you're uncomfortable.
Then you're ready to do
the real work of healing.
So I'm hoping people can
choose that before they
get so uncomfortable
they get forced into it.
But I have never found a
way to force them into it.
Nor would I really want
to because free will
is so important.
>> I agree, but I don't see it.
Well, I mean--
meaning that I see
a lot of people who say like
you were saying earlier,
that they're loving themselves,
and they're all independent,
and they're doing
their own thing.
But they're really
not, and they're
really good at convincing
themselves and others
that they are.
>> Yeah, so listen for
the people that are saying
they're not there yet.
You know what I mean?
Following the teachers
who say, I am enlightened,
is a dangerous, dangerous game.
Find the ones who are
like, nope, not there yet.
They're going to be safe.
The same way as somebody who's
like, no, I'm not completely
in love with myself
yet, probably
actually is closer to
self-love than the people who
are in denial about it.
[APPLAUSE]
You good?
>> Yeah.
>> OK.
>> Thank you.
>> OK, so that being
said, my message today,
if you didn't get it already,
is that you have got to embrace,
that is accept, own, the parts
of yourself that people have
told you are not OK and help
other people do the same.
Because it's my
hope that we can end
the fragmentation in
ourselves and, by doing so,
end the fragmentation
in this world.
So thank you for standing
with me in this movement
and know that I love
you guys very much.
[APPLAUSE]